with me.
The Lord, we thank you.
Thank you that you do give us your word.
Thank you, O Lord, that you, by the power of your Holy Spirit, you help us to have open eyes and open minds and open ears for what you are telling us through it, who you are and who we are to you and the way of salvation.
God, would you bring understanding to us this morning?
Would you enlighten and warm our hearts to you?
We pray this for our youth downstairs.
We ask that you would be with them as they talk, especially about the Lord's Supper and how we receive and see you in that meal.
Thank God for our nursery as well.
Would you bless the youngest ones that we have, help them to be already knowing your love, experiencing your love through our nursery workers.
We thank you for them and for their commitment.
God, we pray that you would bless us in this time.
May it be fruitful, may it be pleasing to you, O Lord.
Amen.
All right, John chapter three is what we're looking at this morning, verses one to 15.
John three, chapter, verses one through 15.
John tells the story, now there was a Pharisee, a man named Nicodemus, who was a member of the Jewish ruling council.
He came to Jesus at night and said, Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God,
For no one could perform the signs you are doing if God were not with him."
When Jesus replied very truly, I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God unless they are born again.
Well, how can someone be born when they are old Nicodemus asked?
Surely they cannot enter a second time into their mother's womb to be born.
Jesus answered very truly, I tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless they are born of water and the spirit.
Flesh gives birth to flesh.
but the spirit gives birth to spirit.
You should not be surprised at my saying, you must be born again.
The wind blows wherever it pleases.
You hear it sound, but you cannot tell where it comes from or where it is going.
So it is with everyone born of the spirit.
How can this be?
Nicodemus asked.
You are Israel's teacher said Jesus, and you do not understand these things.
Very truly I tell you, we speak of what we know.
And we testify to what we have seen, but still you people do not accept our testimony.
I have spoken to you of earthly things and you do not believe, well how then will you believe if I speak of heavenly things?
No one has ever gone into heaven except the one who came from heaven, the son of man.
Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness so the son of man must be lifted up.
That everyone who believes may have eternal life in him.
This is the word of the Lord and we say,
Thanks be to God.
Just to let you know how this sermon is going to go, so it's easier for you to track and understand.
We're going to spend a little bit of time talking about the actual setting in the context of the passage.
And then we're going to walk through three takeaways as it comes to understanding God's
or as it comes to understanding the Bible.
So first setting, then we'll talk about three takeaways.
So talking about the setting first, well it's Nicodemus.
Nicodemus is not a dull guy.
He's a Pharisee, which means that Nicodemus has probably spent the majority of his life studying scripture, the Hebrew scriptures which we consider to be the Old Testament.
Pharisees were very,
They were very diligent.
They were very thorough in their study and in their following of Scripture.
If something were to change in the culture, any advancements in culture, well, they were the ones who would interpret, well, how are we to read God's law?
How are we to follow God's law considering these changes?
And not only was Nicodemus a Pharisee, though,
He was somebody who was recognized by his peers, recognized by others as being an authority.
Jesus literally says to him, you are the teacher of Israel.
So he's not just a normal Pharisee guy.
It seems like he has a little bit elevated status where the people do recognize him, that he is maybe a master teacher.
People come to him for understanding.
But we also read here that Nicodemus is maybe walking a little bit in the dark.
Now it says that he comes to see Jesus at nighttime and curious that he comes to see Jesus at nighttime.
And if we take this in context, it's because Nicodemus does lack understanding.
And when you come to somebody at nighttime, you can't see properly.
There's not enough light to make things out.
And so John is alluding to the fact that old Nicodemus has kind of this misunderstanding when it comes to God's word, this thing that he is supposed to be a master of as the teacher of Israel.
Oh, Jesus says to him, you are the teacher of Israel, and yet you do not understand.
Nicodemus, his understanding specifically scripture and entrance in the kingdom of God is what we're talking about.
If Nicodemus was approached by a student who said, well, how do I gain entrance to the kingdom of God?
He probably would have said something along the lines of will I teach lineage and law.
Lineage, we are born from Abraham.
We are Abraham's descendants
which means that we are God's chosen people through Abraham.
In order to keep this privileged position, this position of favor, we keep God's commands, we keep God's laws.
There's a very horizontal way to understand things, a very human way.
Born from Abraham, we walk the path keeping God's laws, being obedient to what he says, and then when we die, we enter the kingdom of God.
Jesus though, he says to him,
You're Israel's teacher.
You do not understand.
No one can see the kingdom of God unless they are born again or born from above as a double meaning.
No one can enter the kingdom of God unless they are born of water and spirit.
Now maybe we don't pick up on it as readily because we're not as well versed in the Old Testament as Nicodemus would have been.
But these two words held together
water and spirit, well, they would have stood out for Nicodemus because they have meaning.
They have significance.
Water use figurative cleanses.
It cleanses.
It purifies.
Spirit, it brings renewal.
It brings about life.
These words are held together most forcefully in the Old Testament in Ezekiel 36 where God says, I will sprinkle clean water on you and you will be clean.
I will put a new heart in you.
I will give you a new spirit.
Well, God's people had turned away from him.
Their hearts were hard towards the Lord.
They were spiritually dead.
So much so that
Ezekiel the next chapter compares them to this valley of dry bones, dry bones that only come to life when the spirit is poured out over them.
So what Jesus is saying with these words that you must be born from above, you can't enter into the kingdom of God unless you are born of water and spirit.
Jesus is saying that a transformation has to happen.
It doesn't happen at this human level has to come from above.
It's this vertical relationship that God does something inside of us, that it is God's work.
That it's not enough to be physically born as Abraham's descendant.
It is not enough to follow the law.
It doesn't cut it.
God has to do something.
And Nicodemus is dark in his understanding of Scripture, this master teacher of Israel that he can't or maybe he won't see it the way that Jesus is teaching it.
He's content with his own understanding.
He's resting on his own credentials.
So as we think about this,
as we try to think, okay, what does this mean for us?
There are some takeaways.
So how is your understanding of scripture?
How is your understanding of the Bible?
Now admittedly, the Bible is a hard book to understand, right?
It's one book, but it's composed of 66 other books.
It's written across a period of thousands and thousands of years, different cultures, different languages, different genres of scripture, different intentions.
And so it is a book that's hard to understand,
Sometimes we may be faced with a temptation to say, well, I can't understand it.
And so I am just going to kind of dismiss it.
I'm going to push it to the side.
I'm not going to engage with it.
But what's the alternative here?
What's the alternative?
We're gonna look to ourselves and to our own wisdom.
Are we gonna seek understanding from the news or social media or podcasters?
Where are we going to get this wisdom and this understanding that we need to live life faithfully?
The book of Proverbs says, lean not on your own understanding.
Don't look to yourself for wisdom.
The book of Romans, Romans 3 says,
No one understands.
There is no one who understands.
Job reminds us that God is great.
God is beyond our understanding.
Well, if we want to know God, the only way for us to know Him is for Him to reveal Himself to us.
Well, God wants us to know him.
God has given us his word so that we might know him, his ways, his kingdom, his character.
And so what we're given are these instructions from scripture that say, we'll cry out for understanding.
Though it may cost everything that you have, get understanding.
If we want to know understanding from the Lord, it comes from his mouth.
It is his wisdom, his revelation that comes to us through his word.
And so we approach, when we come to Scripture, we approach it in humility.
We do ask, we do pray, Lord, help me to understand.
But there's more, right?
But it's not just this crying out for understanding and this prayer to God.
No, God provides people.
God provides the church to help us understand.
Nicodemus, he comes to Jesus.
He's the master teacher, somebody who you think, well, they don't need any further education.
They're the ones teaching.
Well, no, he comes to Jesus.
Likewise, in the book of Acts, in chapter eight, this is after the stoning of Stephen, when the church is being persecuted and God's people are being sent out, they're being scattered.
Do you remember Philip?
Philip is sent to, sent it down south of Jerusalem and he's sent on a road where a chariot is coming by.
And inside this chariot, there's a man who is reading scripture.
And he hears this man who's reading from the book of Isaiah.
And so he comes up alongside of the charity and says, excuse me,
Do you understand what you are reading?
Do you remember what the man says?
Well, how can I understand unless somebody explains it to me?
Yeah, that makes sense.
So fill up
Philip is invited into the chariot with this Ethiopian eunuch.
And he explains to him the words of scripture starting with this passage of Isaiah, and he preaches him, he explains he walks with him through this understanding of the good news.
Yes, God's word is hard to understand, but we approach it humbly.
We cry out to God because it's only from Him through whom we receive understanding.
But God also provides us with community, with people around us.
So maybe in your prayers, you're crying out, Lord, help me to understand this book that you've given to understand you.
Maybe the Lord's response is, well, I'm inviting you to join a Bible study.
I'm inviting you to join a group.
I'm inviting you to ask for help, to seek out a mentor,
to join somebody to come alongside you in this because we do this as a community.
So that's the first takeaway is a cry out for understanding.
Go to those places where the Lord is providing you with understanding, or maybe it's becoming available for somebody else to walk alongside somebody else to help in their understanding of Scripture.
That was the first one.
On the other side of this, there's another side of this maybe that we go on the other side.
We're very good about dissecting Scripture.
And we put Scripture up on the table, and we circle, and we underline, and we highlight, and we really dig into its history, and to its genre, and to the author, and to the attention of it, who the audience is.
And this is good.
But I wonder if sometimes, like Nicodemus, that we come to Scripture unwilling
to allow God to say what he wants to say.
We come with our own expectations.
We come with our own guards unwilling to allow God's word to speak to us.
Now, Pastor and author Mandy Smith, she reminds us that scripture.
Scripture is not the thing that is on the table for dissection.
We are.
Scripture is not the thing that we are taking apart.
It goes the other way around that we are the ones laid out on the table being opened up by God's word.
Because the author of Hebrews tells us that the word of God is what it's alive and it's alive and active.
Yeah, it's sharper than what?
a double edged sword.
And it pierces even to dividing.
Remember spirit and soul and joints and marrow.
It cuts through the intentions.
It cuts through the motivation.
It cuts through these attitudes that are deep within our heart.
Second takeaway, allow scripture to read us.
Allow scripture to dissect us.
Now, what does this look like?
So if you keep up with seeing Jesus together, it's a reading planet.
It goes through one New Testament, chapter one, Old Testament, chapter Monday through Friday, and it gives you journaling prompts as well.
But this past week, for a stretch, we're reading through the book of First Kings in the Old Testament.
In Old First Kings, chapter 12, there's this story of Rahoboam.
Rahoboam is a king who comes after Solomon.
Rahoboam, he inherits this kingdom from his father
Solomon, he assumes the throne of this kingdom that is pretty tenuous.
It's on the verge of fracturing.
He receives the throne and the people from the northern tribes of Israel, they come to him and they say, hey, your father, Solomon, he put a really heavy yoke on our neck.
We paid a lot of taxes.
We did a lot of labor.
Could you be so kind as to lighten this load for us?
Rehoboam says, okay, I want you to come back in three days.
I need to think about this.
And so he goes and he seeks the advice of the elders.
And the elders say, yes, what the people say, this is good.
This is right.
Sure, we might lose a little bit of labor and some taxes, but if we're kind to the people, they will follow you.
They will support you.
Well, then Rehoboam, he goes to his friends.
He says, well, friends, what do you think about this?
And they say, oh, no, no, no.
They say, we need to be severe.
If your father Solomon scourges them with whips, we need to scourge them with scorpions.
Yeah, right.
And so Rehoboam, he follows the advice of his friends.
And what happens is that he ends up, this is really like the pressure that breaks this kingdom apart into the northern tribes of Israel, into the southern tribe of Judah.
And now if we're reading this scripture based merely for its historical significance, we would say, oh, yeah, this is great.
I now have an understanding of really what happened in the northern and the southern kingdoms breakup.
And I feel like a wiser person for it.
But if we're allowing scripture to read us, if we're allowing scripture to dissect us, we might be asking the question, well, how am I about asking for advice?
How am I about receiving feedback?
And when somebody gives me some feedback that is hard to hear, maybe that might cause me discomfort, it might cause me loss, well, how do I respond to that?
Am I making decisions that are good for me, or am I maybe making decisions that are good for the people that are around me?
Scripture.
We'll cut through our intentions.
Scripture will cut through our motivations if we allow it.
Are we allowing ourselves to be laid bare?
are we allowing ourselves to take off our armor, to take off our protection and come before God's Word and allow the Holy Spirit to use this tool of incision on us, to make its cuts so that God might be working on us, performing surgery for our good and for His glory.
Okay, so the first, do you remember what the first takeaway was?
Cry out for understanding.
Look to God's people for understanding.
The second one is allow scripture to read us, allow scripture to dissect us and have its work in us.
The third, the third takeaway that I want us to see is allow scripture to do what scripture does best.
And that is point us to Jesus.
Now, Jesus at the end of this passage, he says, well, just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, will so too must the son of man be lifted up, so that everyone who believes in him will have eternal life or everlasting life.
Jesus, of course, he's pointing to something that comes out of the wilderness story from Israel in Numbers chapter 21, where the people of Israel, they didn't listen to God.
They rebelled against God.
They turned their hearts from Him.
And so God sent venomous snakes into their camp.
God sent venomous snakes and they bit the people.
Many people were hurt.
Many people were killed.
That caused the people to turn.
They repented.
They turned.
They confessed their sin.
And God said, okay, Moses, what I want you to do is I want you to make a snake.
So Moses makes a snake out of bronze.
I want you to take this snake, I want you to put it on a pole, and I want you to raise it up before the people.
And everyone who looks at this snake on this pole will be healed.
Jesus says, just as Moses held up this snake and lifted up the snake on this pole so the son of man must be lifted up.
The son of man will be lifted up on the cross, that everyone who looks to him, everyone who is infected with sin will be cleansed, will be healed.
Well, this is how new life is given.
This is how the transformation happens.
New birth happens by looking to Jesus, by trusting in Jesus his life, his death, in his resurrection.
This is what Jesus is pointing Nicodemus to and he's using the words of scripture and he draws out Ezekiel.
He draws out this book of numbers with everything is pointing to him.
Two chapters later in John's gospel, John chapter five he'll be confronted by more religious leaders and he'll say you study the scriptures diligently because it's in them that you think you find life.
He says really these scriptures testify about me.
These scriptures are pointing to me.
He says, you read Moses and you believe Moses.
Well, if you do that, you would believe me because Moses was writing about me.
Everything in scripture points us to Jesus.
Everything in scripture tells us this is the way.
The Bible is not primarily a book of rules to be followed.
The Bible is not primarily a book of doctrine.
The Bible is not primarily a book of history.
The Bible is not primarily a plan of social action.
It's not primarily a mystery to be solved at these times and events that are to come.
No, the Bible is primarily the story of God's salvation, of God's rescuing a wayward humanity through Jesus Christ.
Whenever we open up the pages of Scripture, we are looking to find Jesus.
What does this passage tell me about Christ?
What does this passage tell me about mining, about our need for a Savior?
What does this passage tell me about His work?
What does this passage tell me about God's desperate love?
God's desperate plan of salvation for His people through Jesus Christ.
This is what God has done for us, giving us Jesus Christ, giving us his word that points to him.
So scripture, understanding the Bible, it's calling out to God for understanding.
He is the only one who gives revelation.
He gives it through his spirit.
He gives it through his people.
He gives it through his church.
allowing the scripture to read us, to look deep within us, to dissect us, coming before the scriptures laid bare, open, forgot to do his work, and looking to Jesus, allowing the scriptures to point us to Christ, the only one who grants us eternal life.
All of God's people said, amen.
All right, take a second, take a minute or two.
Let's just to reflect what is God calling me to do as a response to his word, as he calling me to change an attitude.
Is he calling me to re-engage with the Bible?
Have I kind of put it on the shelf because of lack of understanding?
Have I been guarded as I approached the pages of Scripture?
Do I need to allow God's people to speak into my life where I've been maybe a little bit guarded or hesitant?
This is a time for me to say, yeah, I do need to submit myself to Christ.
If nothing else in this time, maybe it's offering God your thanksgiving for something, for his word, for his salvation, for creating you.
As the kids are gonna come in, just take a second, think about what is this?
What is this passage calling us to?
What is God's word calling us to?